This is an interview with Dana Hefner by Margaret
Hefner on April 15, 1990, in Wharton, Texas,
concerning the topic of the Vietnam War. In the
interest of accumulating knowledge, I'm asking
you to donate this tape to me or to the Texas A&M Oral
History Collection in the University Archives.
Is this all right with you? Yes, it is. Okay, I'm
just going to start by asking you a few questions.
All right. What was your specific duty in the Air
Force, and how did this relate to your perceptions
of the war? Specific duties were munitions
maintenance with the 431st Munition Maintenance
Squadron,
Tui Wa, Vietnam, Republic of Vietnam. Our
specific duties were... the production of
munitions from 22 caliber small arms to 250 to 750
pound bombs, napalm and HE.
We flew support missions for ground support
troops.
We flew very few missions, if any, into North
Vietnam. All was done in South Vietnam for support
of the troops.
Okay, and when did you join the Air Force, or did you
volunteer? After high school, I went to Del Mar
Tech in Corpus Christi for a short period. The
draft was real heavy. And I figured I would get into
the Air Force rather than going to the Army, where
possibly I could get a further education. This was
in the latter part of 65 and early 66.
When were you in Vietnam? What specific, okay, you
just said. The specific dates in Vietnam was from
around
Easter. Of 68 to 79, give or take 30 days would
accumulate a year. Okay, and when were you there?
68 and 69. 68, okay. Okay, can you describe the
countryside and the village and the base at which
you were stationed in Vietnam? Tuliwala was a
brand new Air Force base when I got there. In fact,
it hadn't been completed. We were right on the
beach of the South China Sea, about 165 miles south
of Da Nang.
We were bordered on the other side by a mountainous
area and some jungle with villages on the outlying
perimeter. Approximately...
12 to 14 miles from the city of Tui Wah, which is a
Providence capital.
To what extent and in what ways did you interact
with the Vietnamese people? I had very little
dealings with the civilian population as a whole.
We did employ civilians. to work in the munitions
area and on base. We used them quite a bit in our
crews for the building of bombs and rockets and the
assembly of 20 millimeter and 7.62
munitions fire.
How were the Vietnamese people and their culture
viewed by Americans in the Air Force? or people
you're around? I'm not real sure about other
people. I viewed their customs and their
traditions as very odd. Never being in an Asian
country, I'd never been around Asians. And they
did some funny things. In fact, we used to laugh a
lot when it came time for a child, they would wash
their feet over preference of washing their
hands, which I thought was really funny.
Okay. How do you think, from your experience, the
Vietnamese viewed American soldiers and the
American people?
I believe that the majority of the Vietnamese that
I encountered were very supportive and very glad
to have the Americans there.
They seemed to want their freedom and expected the
Americans to help them obtain it. But you know,
there's that minority that we find all over the
world. They were very skeptical.
And what was an average daily routine for you in
Vietnam? An average daily routine? We split up on
shifts where a month at a time we would work nights,
usually go to work around 6 o'clock, and get off
anywhere from 6 to 7 in the morning, which we
enjoyed the night shift because it was so much
cooler. And our day shifts were from around 7 to 7,
with elapsing for child time. A little time off
every
night. In what way did you see a war change after the
Tet Offensive was launched on January 31, 1968? I
saw a larger movement. of North Vietnamese moving
into the country, and they were being supported
very well
by communist countries from the weapons that were
captured.
There was a demoralization of the American troops
somewhat after the Tet Offensive. because of the
step up and the build up of the numbers of people.
Really, as far as politically wise, I didn't see
any change in it. Okay. The base that you were
stationed, was that the base of the TAC during Tet?
Or you were there at that point? No, I was not. Okay.
How was President Johnson and his policy of
escalation viewed by Americans in Vietnam?
I think as a whole the American G.I. viewed
President Johnson's stand in Vietnam as a
patriotic duty.
Our feelings were that we were over there to
overthrow communist rule to a sovereign
government. And we believed that our president
was trying to do that.
What aspects of careerism in the military did you
encounter? Did you ever see any of that?
No, not really. What was the morale like among the
Americans in Vietnam, like pre and post Tet?
Morale fluctuated quite a bit the whole period I
was there. It was always up and down. I couldn't see
where the Tet had anything to do with it. It seemed
to me like it was a day-to-day struggle. to
accomplish a job that we were sent there for and in
hopes to get it done within the period of a year
while you're there and get home.
What was the general attitude of Americans toward
their commanding officers and duties, and how was
this exemplified? I think that in my squadron, We
were very supportive of our commanding officers.
Accommodation medals were given out for just
about everybody that was there in the 431st
Munition Maintenance Squadron while I was over
there.
Our commanding officers were very sympathetic of
the conditions we were living under and the
stress.
It was exemplified by our actions in our
profession. Did you see many GI dissidents when
you were there? No, I didn't.
Okay. In what way or by what means do you think the
war could have been won if you felt like the war
could have been won? And how do you feel like that
could be accomplished? I think that there was so
many limitations placed upon the American
soldiers and the Allied soldiers that were over
there. The Vietnamese and the Viet Cong had no
boundaries. They crossed at will into Cambodia.
Whereas the GIs and the Allied forces had boundary
lines. And the Vietnamese fought a guerrilla
warfare.
You take, for instance, somebody coming into your
country, and you know your homeland. Go up in the
Smoky Mountains. These people that live there can
run and hide for months on end. They strike And
there's no way to strike back. And I believe the
limitations that was put on the American soldier
and the allied forces that were there was a
tremendous problem. This was probably the
biggest morale falter that there was. It was way
too many limitations. And I believe the war could
have been won if some of these limitations would
have been lifted.
What type of limitations do you mean? Well, like I
say, there are boundaries, for instance. We were
not allowed to go into Cambodia. We were not
allowed to go into any of the Laotian countries.
Or we were not supposed to. And I think that this
restricted our own power.
I think that the American fighting man is probably
the best trained. And
probably the highest credit that can be given to
him is fighting in this country with the
limitations that was forced on him.
How did you and others in Vietnam cope with death,
frustration, fear, and boredom? A lot of it was
making up jokes, finding things to do that we found
humorous. For a while, we were stenciling bombs
and such that we were sending to a flight line to be
flown in sorties. with stenciled little slogans
like this is a Charlie's cook stove on a napalm
bomb, or Ho Chi Minh's a Quaker, or turtle mating
season from April 19th to March 32nd, and things
like this. We did have...
We did have town leave that we could take, which I
didn't find necessary. But we had several open air
movies on base if you weren't too tired to go. And we
drank a lot of hooch.
What was something that you were commanded to do
that you found extremely emotionally difficult
to cope? Being in a war zone,
I found it unbearable to think that the base
cleanliness was such a priority.
Like I say, being right on the South China Sea The
whole compound was sand. And there was grass seed
thrown in from the United States to be planted in
the sand. Well, with the shifting winds and the
tides and the torrential rains, the seed never had
a chance to even sprout. So when this was
squelched, They decided that instead of trying to
grow grass, that we would rake the sand and keep it
nice and level. Another thing was pulling KP. Many
times we had to pull KP and still work a 12-hour
shift. And like I say, we did employ Vietnamese
civilians on base that could have worked KP.
Instead it was sold. So it was very difficult to put
up with such nonsense. Now, and what exactly, what
exactly is KP? That is kitchen potholes. Oh.
That's where you go in and peel potatoes or wash
dishes and straighten up mess off.
What type of response did you receive from the
American public as a whole when you came back from
Vietnam? As a whole, I felt the American public was
very offish. I think the American public was
told things that weren't true.
Very, very, very few times did I ever have anyone
congratulate me for the effort that I put while I
was over there. Most of the time they would add, oh,
you were in Vietnam and let it go at that. My family
was very supportive.
My nieces, nephews,
my mother, my father, all my brothers and sisters,
aunts and uncles. But as a whole, the general
public was very bold.
How has your perception of patriotism and service
to your country changed after Vietnam, and why
did it change? If it changed at all, I believe I
became more patriotic. I think that being in a
country such as Vietnam and seeing the tragedies
and of people being so suppressed that my
patriotism grew deeper. I would never, I would
never ever want to see my children or any
descendants of this country have to face what
those people in Vietnam
did. In your opinion, what were some major
military mistakes that could have
been avoided? I'm not a military leader, and I
never claimed to be.
There's mistakes made in every conflict or war.
And if they could have been avoided, I believe they
would have. Everybody is doing mistakes. And
hopefully, if we ever have to go to another country
to support what we believe in, in democracy, that
those mistakes could be corrected, if there was
any mistakes made.
I feel that some of the rules could have been
changed to help support the military personnel
that was over there, not only the United States. We
had South Koreans there, and we had Australians,
and these people fought hard.
In what way did your experience affect your
attitude, beliefs, and actions when it was time to
carry on an ordinary life in the States?
Probably when I came back, what I mostly thought of
was
classes of people that are in our country. whether
it be for economic reasons or educational
reasons. I would love to see this corrected,
if at all possible.
Any time a person is suppressed, it not only
affects themselves and their immediate family,
but it affects all people.
If you had to tell someone of the AIDS generation
anything that you learned from your experience in
Vietnam, what would it be?
To always keep the attitude. That no matter how
much freedom you do have, that you can lose it. And
that you would always stay on your toes and stay
abreast of everything that is going on.
Never, never ever give up your freedom.
Okay, well thank you very much, Dana. Certainly.